---
layout: post
title: An in-depth look at the Explore Internship Interview Process 
---

I know when I was applying for internships in the Summer and Fall of 2019, I was wholly confused about the interviews and the actual intricacies of what goes on, especially during the interview process for a big name company like Microsoft. 
The Explore internship is an internship aimed at freshmen and sophomores in college. It’s supposed to entail the two main parts of software creation – software engineering and project management, in order to give students exposure to both fields. 

## A bit about me at the time
I was wrapping up my internship at Interac, the Canadian version of Venmo & tap technologies combined. While Interac is well known in Canada, the company has less public attention in the United States, which was where I hoped to secure an internship the following summer. That same summer, I was working with an undergraduate research group at the University of Toronto called iGEM, where I was the computational biology lead. I had also just switched my major from Chemical Engineering to Engineering Science. 

## Application timeline 
During  August, I went home and applied to the ‘big n’ and FAANG internships in my  spare time. I also reached out to the alumni network from the University of Toronto on LinkedIn, in particular the Engineering and Engineering Science grads who were working at Microsoft. I only managed to get hold of one person, who I cold emailed to schedule a chat by the last week of August. During this time, I had already applied for the Explore internship position. 
I scheduled my chat and had an enlightening discussion about the requirements for application as well as how to succeed in securing the internship. After the conversation, he had not offered to refer me for the position, so I asked him if he could do so. Fortunately, he said he would be able to do so after his three-week vacation. School had already started by this time, so I thanked him for the opportunity and set a reminder to reach out in three weeks time. Turns out I got my phone screen even before he could refer me! 
### Phone Screen 
Two weeks into September, I got an email to schedule a phone screen for Microsoft. They used some proprietary software to schedule the interview and used MS Teams to schedule the audio-chat. The interview was extremely behavioral heavy, asking about my knowledge of technologies and to explain how I had architected some of the technologies I worked on at Interac. I believe there would have been another technical oriented question, but the interviewer and I spoke for such a long time that we did not have time for it. 
One thing to note was that I believe the initial interview was aimed for the SWE internship, which I had also applied for, but the interviewer was extremely surprised to learn I was a sophomore. He asked me multiple times my graduation year. I then received an email from Katie Maillet, the Canadian University Recruiter who asked me if I was interested in the Explore internship. I informed her that I had applied for both SWE and Explore in Redmond and Vancouver, after which she  ‘submitted me’ for the Explore position.  
### On-site 
A few weeks later I received an email from another internal Microsoft employee about scheduling an on-site. After a back and forth, I decided to bite the proverbial bullet and interview for the third week of November. There were earlier options available, but I was so hesitant on choosing I kept pushing it back. Once I decided on a date, they sent out some emails regarding logistical details such as flights and accommodation. Since I live in Toronto, they flew me out of Pearson airport with a connecting flight in Calgary for the 3 day sprint. On the first day, I woke up and flew to Seattle, settling in a hotel ten minutes from the interview building. The next day, I was in the morning batch of interviews, but had the evening to myself. On the last day, I had an early flight back through Calgary to Toronto. If you are a Canadian, I’d highly recommend bringing some USD currency with you!
When you land in SeaTac, if you have to take a Taxi or Uber to the hotel, do so with no worries - Microsoft will reimburse you for that cost. I took an Uber from SeaTac to my hotel in Redmond. It was during sunset and you could see how beautiful the islands and water looks along the drive. Check-in at the hotel just required your ID since Microsoft was taking care of it. I was particularly confused about the food expense but let me be clear – you have $75 USD to spend, per day, on food. I would recommend not ordering from the hotel since they are often overcharging you for sub-par food, but you can order from anywhere you’d like as long as you keep the receipts. 
Once I got to my room, I became a shut-in and continued working on problems. I also ironed the shirt and pants I had brought for the interview and prepared for the next day’s interview. 
Since my hotel was so close to the Microsoft campus and the air was crisp & beautiful (way better than November snow in Toronto) I decided to walk to the interview. This was a disaster because I didn’t have Wi-Fi connectivity so I stumbled around campus for a while until I got to the building, all the while building up back sweat from my heavy winter coat! The interview process began at around 10 am where you check-in at the interview building with your ID. They issue you a lanyard with a sticker colour corresponding to the position you’d be interviewing for. Explore interns were issued a dark blue . I immediately went to the washroom to reveal a Rorschach test on the back of my dress shirt. I decided the best thing was to just go for it & hope it dried out by itself (thank god it did)! They made us say our names and schools in a circle, issued us some credit on a card to eat on the Microsoft campus and gave us a brief tour. From there we were led back to the building and told to wait for our interviews. 
The first interview was fairly simple, a modified fizzbuzz interview problem. The unfortunate thing for me was that I completely flopped it. I forgot how the modulo operator worked and just blanked on the rest of the problem. The behavioral section went well, just some basic problems. 
The second interview was more complex, having dealt with the leetcode [#238 Product of Array but itself]( https://leetcode.com/problems/product-of-array-except-self/) Here I worked really hard to showcase my technical ability & got the correct solution, but really to demonstrate that I knew what I was talking about on the PM side as well. 
Since I was in the morning section, I found some friends and we explored Seattle a bit together. I’d highly recommend doing that! I ended up meeting my pod-mate Ali at the same time! 
After a stressful flight home where I worked on some school work, I found out on Monday that I’d been given the offer! Fairly quickly! Interestingly, I was extremely nervous, because I fully thought I’d been rejected after having done so poorly in the first interview then done mediocrely (in my opinion) on the second. 
### Interview preparation
First thing, is **INTERVIEW EARLY** the earlier you interview the more breathing room you give yourself. The application cycle is difficult and long, so it is vital you prepare early. I made this mistake while preparing for other interviews, which will hopefully be updated in another post. 
They only schedule interviews on Tuesdays or Thursdays and I chose Thursday. To my __great__ intellect, I chose a week where I had a Quantum Midterm on Monday, a Thermo Midterm on Thursday and an essay due the Saturday. Not to mention the week prior I had a similar Fluid Mechanics midterm and a Differential Equations midterm. I had chosen to interview in the thicket of midterm season – don’t do that. 
That being the situation I was in, I had the 10 leetcode problems I had done through the semester and the (sparsely read) CTCI in my desk draw as preparation by the Monday before my interview. After my Quantum midterm, I started preparation almost immediately for the interview by trying to read CTCI but honestly, I found it to be quite useless. The content makes you jump around and did not focus on what information was needed. I ended up doing about 4-5 leetcode problems between the Monday and Tuesday before my interview. I had also bought a pocket version of Elements of Programming Interviews, which was the main resource I used as interview preparation. While waiting for the bus, in the airport, and especially on the airplane, I had the book out and was doing problems. I must have done another 6-10 problems in total before my interview. **This is not what you should do**  Prepare a lot -  at minimum 30 leetcodes from Easys & mediums - plus whatever exposure you can get on different problems as well. 
On the behavioral side, have a few stories ready to go, be sure to be able to hit all the pillars of PM succinctly. Try to make yourself look creative, and a team player in all your stories. 

## Final Thoughts 
As you prepare for your interview, remember so many people are in your shoes and they’ve all come through the other side. Try to come across as confident and knowledgeable (which I’m sure you are!). Exercise some more intelligence than I did when applying and going through the process and you will do amazingly. Good luck, you’ll kill it! If you ever see me around, give me a shout! 

*Special thanks to Elisa Ding who edited this post & provided advice*

